goodpractice tech note (#1307)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2026-05-28-goodpractice/index.md

---
slug: goodpractice
title: "Our goodpractice package has new superpowers"
author:
    - Mark Padgham
    - Athanasia Mo Mowinckel

> date: '2026-05-28'

Reviewer: If you push this back, remember to change the date here and in folder name

Author: I'll change everything right now, and happy to push back until tomorrow. Thanks

tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice  
description: We have worked hard over the past few months on major upgrades to our goodpractice package. Checks are now grouped into categories, making it easier to control which checks are run. The biggest change has been adding over 100 new checks, from new lints to many new CRAN checks. 
params:
  doi: 10.59350/3ne4y-5sk72
---

The [goodpractice package](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice) has been recommended by rOpenSci since it was first started just over 10 years ago by [Gábor Csárdi](https://gaborcsardi.org/).
We used to ask our editors to manually run goodpractice on all packages submitted to software peer-review, and then to ask authors to fix any notable issues flagged by the package.
It is now integrated within our own [pkgcheck system](https://docs.ropensci.org/pkgcheck), and used to automatically identify any goodpractice issues with all new submissions.

> The package has transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024/06/21/ropensci-news-june-2024/#ropensci-takes-over-maintenance-of-the-goodpractice-package) before Gábor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).

Reviewer: The link associated with "several times" seems to support the fact that rOpenSci took it over, rather than that it's had several maintainers? Do you have a better link? Otherwise I'd remove it.
```suggestion
The package changed maintainers [several times](/blog/2024/06/21/ropensci-news-june-2024/#ropensci-takes-over-maintenance-of-the-goodpractice-package) before Gábor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).
```

> The package has transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024/06/21/ropensci-news-june-2024/#ropensci-takes-over-maintenance-of-the-goodpractice-package) before Gábor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024/06/21/ropensci-news-june-2024/#ropensci-takes-over-maintenance-of-the-goodpractice-package) before Gábor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).
```

So, for example, if you wanted to skip the [rcmdcheck](https://rcmdcheck.r-lib.org) checks, you had to do something like this:
``` r
mychecks <- grepv("^rcmdcheck", all_checks(), invert = TRUE)
gp(checks = mychecks)
```
That wasn't easy!
And honestly, most people just didn't bother.

This update finally makes it easier to control checks, by defining them in "groups", which generally correspond to the separate packages that run the actual checks.
The groups can be seen with the new [`all_check_groups()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_check_groups.html), and controlled with the [`checks_by_group()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/checks_by_group.html).
Checks can be controlled by simply naming the check groups you want to run, like this:

``` r
gp(checks = checks_by_group("description", "lintr"))
```

## New check groups

The documentation for the [`all_check_groups()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_check_groups.html) shows all the new check groups added in this update, including:

> Group name | Run by default? | description

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group name | Run by default? | Description
```

--- | --- | ---
description | yes | Check common issues with `DESCRIPTION` files, including formatting issues with URLs, DOIs, package names, and author and contributor roles, along with other common `DESCRIPTION` issues.
rd | yes | Check whether or not `man/*.Rd` function documentation includes both example code and return values (regardless of whether or not documentation files are generated by [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/)).

> [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) | yes | Applied to packages that use Roxygen2 to generate documentation.

Reviewer: What exactly do these check for? Does my edit make sense? Do you have more specific details to add?
```suggestion
[roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) | yes | Check for problems with Roxygen2 generated documentation.
```

> [revdep](https://github.com/r-lib/revdepcheck) | no | Reverse-dependency checks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[revdep](https://github.com/r-lib/revdepcheck) | no | Reverse-dependency checks.
```

> code_structure | yes | Common issues like functions which are duplicated, or not actually used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code_structure | yes | Checks for common issues like duplicated or unused functions.
```

[spelling](https://docs.ropensci.org/spelling/) | yes | Check spelling.
[tidyverse](https://tidyverse.org) | no | Check compliance with the [*Tidyverse style guide*](https://style.tidyverse.org/), mostly [lintr](https://lintr.r-lib.org/) checks.
[urlchecker](https://urlchecker.r-lib.org/) | yes | Check whether all URLs are valid.
vignette | yes | Check that vignette code does not use either `rm()` or `setwd()`.

Many of these checks are powered by [treesitter](/blog/2026/04/02/tree-sitter-overview/), the extremely efficient syntax parsing library used by GitHub — which is genuinely neat to have working in R.
The number of checks has been increased from 230 to 338, with all listed in the output of the [`all_checks()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_checks.html).

## Improved check reporting

The goodpractice package has always been designed for console output.
This updated version now provides immediate and consistent detail on check progress while running.
The [cli package](https://cli.r-lib.org) is also used to give consistently formatted output for all check groups.

> The large increase in numbers of checks also means that directly printing goodpractice results may fill several screens of output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The large increase in checks also means that directly printing goodpractice results may fill several screens of output.
```

This update also adds a `groups` parameter to the [`print()` method](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/print.goodPractice.html), to enable printing check results only for specified groups.

> So you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.
```

We've found this turns what could feel like an overwhelming wall of output into a manageable to-do list.

> Like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

---
slug: goodpractice
title: "Our goodpractice package has new superpowers"
author:
    - Mark Padgham
    - Athanasia Mo Mowinckel
date: '2026-05-28'
tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes

>   - best pratice  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - best practice  
```

description: We have worked hard over the past few months on major upgrades to our goodpractice package. Checks are now grouped into categories, making it easier to control which checks are run. The biggest change has been adding over 100 new checks, from new lints to many new CRAN checks. 
params:
  doi:
---

The [goodpractice package](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice) has been recommended by rOpenSci since it was first started just over 10 years ago by [Gabor Csardi](https://gaborcsardi.org/).
We used to ask our editors to manually run goodpractice on all packages submitted to software peer-review, and then to ask authors to fix any notable issues flagged by the package.
It is now integrated within our own [pkgcheck system](https://docs.ropensci.org/pkgcheck), and used to automatically identify any goodpractice issues with all new submissions.
The package has transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024-06-21-news-june-2024/index.md) before Gabor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).

> We are pleased to announce that we have recently implemented a host of updates and extensions to the package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're really pleased to share that we've recently rolled out a host of updates and extensions to the package.
```

These make it both easier to use, and more powerful.

## Easier control of checks

The goodpractice package is a convenience wrapper around several other packages including [rcmdcheck](https://rcmdcheck.r-lib.org), [lintr](https://lintr.r-lib.org), [cyclocomp](https://github.com/gaborcsardi/cyclocomp), and [desc](https://desc.r-lib.org/), along with a few hand-coded checks within the package itself.
The previous version of goodpractice had a total of 230 checks, generally prefixed with the name of the package which defined each check.
Checks were identifiable with the single function, [`all_checks()`](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_checks.html).
The only way to control which checks were run was to pass a `checks` parameter to the main function as a character vector of the names of checks you wanted to run.
So, for example, if you wanted to skip the [rcmdcheck](https://rcmdcheck.r-lib.org) checks, you had to do something like this:
``` r
mychecks <- all_checks()[which(!grepl("^rcmdcheck", all_checks()))]

> gp(checks=mychecks)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gp(checks = mychecks)
```

```
That wasn't easy!

> This update finally makes it easier to control checks, by defining them in "groups", which generally corresponding to the separate packages which run the actual checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That wasn't easy!
And honestly, most people just didn't bother.

This update finally makes it easier to control checks, by defining them in "groups", which generally correspond to the separate packages that run the actual checks.
```

The groups can be seen with the new [`all_check_groups()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_check_groups.html), and controlled with the [`checks_by_group()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/checks_by_group.html).
Checks can be controlled by simply naming the check groups you want to run, like this:
``` r
gp(checks = checks_by_group("description", "lintr"))
```

## New check groups

The documentation for the [`all_check_groups()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_check_groups.html) shows all the new check groups added in this update, including:

> - A "description" group to check common issues with `DESCRIPTIION` files, including formatting issues with URLs, DOIs, package names, and author and contributor roles, along with other common `DESCRIPTION` issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A "description" group to check common issues with `DESCRIPTION` files, including formatting issues with URLs, DOIs, package names, and author and contributor roles, along with other common `DESCRIPTION` issues.
```

- An "rd" group to check whether or not `man/*.Rd` function documentation includes both example code and return values (regardless of whether or not documentation files are generated by [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/)).
- A [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) group of checks applied where that package is used to generate documentation.
- An optional [revdep](https://github.com/r-lib/revdepcheck) group for reverse-dependency checking (not run by default).
- "code_structure" checks for a few common issues like functions which are duplicated, or not actually used.
- "package_structure" checks like whether a package has a README, a NEWS file, or whether all files use a `.R` extension, and not `.r`.
- [spelling](https://docs.ropensci.org/spelling/) checks.
- A group of optional [tidyverse](https://tidyverse.org) checks, to check compliance with the [*Tidyverse style guide*](https://style.tidyverse.org/). These are mostly [lintr](https://lintr.r-lib.org/) checks, and are not run by default.
- [urlchecker](https://urlchecker.r-lib.org/) to check whether all URLs are valid.
- A "vignette" group to check that vignette code does not use either `rm()` or `setwd()`.

> Many of these checks are powered by [treesitter](https://davisvaughan.github.io/r-tree-sitter/), the extremely efficient syntax parsing library used by GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of these checks are powered by [treesitter](https://davisvaughan.github.io/r-tree-sitter/), the extremely efficient syntax parsing library used by GitHub — which is genuinely neat to have working in R.
```

The number of checks has been increased from 230 to 338, with all listed in the output of the [`all_checks()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_checks.html).

## Improved check reporting

The goodpractice package has always been designed for console output.
This updated version now provides immediate and consistent detail on check progress while running.
The [cli package](https://cli.r-lib.org) is also used to give consistently formatted output for all check groups.

The large increase in numbers of checks also means that directly printing goodpractice results may fill several screens of output.
This update also adds a `groups` parameter to the [`print()` method](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/print.goodPractice.html), to enable printing check results only for specified groups.

> That way you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.
We've found this turns what could feel like an overwhelming wall of output into a manageable to-do list.
```

---
slug: goodpractice
title: "Our goodpractice package has new superpowers"
author:
    - Mark Padgham
    - Athanasia Mo Mowinckel
date: '2026-05-28'
tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice  
description: We have worked hard over the past few months on major upgrades to our goodpractice package. Checks are now grouped into categories, making it easier to control which checks are run. The biggest change has been adding over 100 new checks, from new lints to many new CRAN checks. 
params:

>   doi:

Reviewer 3: https://docs.ropensci.org/commonmetar/

>   doi:

Author: ```suggestion
  doi: 10.59350/3ne4y-5sk72
```

---

> The [goodpractice package](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice) has been recommended by rOpenSci since it was first started just over 10 years ago by [Gabor Csardi](https://gaborcsardi.org/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [goodpractice package](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice) has been recommended by rOpenSci since it was first started just over 10 years ago by [Gábor Csárdi](https://gaborcsardi.org/).
```

We used to ask our editors to manually run goodpractice on all packages submitted to software peer-review, and then to ask authors to fix any notable issues flagged by the package.
It is now integrated within our own [pkgcheck system](https://docs.ropensci.org/pkgcheck), and used to automatically identify any goodpractice issues with all new submissions.

> The package has transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024-06-21-news-june-2024/index.md) before Gabor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).

Reviewer 3: link to the post, not the Markdown doc. That only works with Quarto I think?
```suggestion
The package has transitioned maintenance [several times](/blog/2024/06/21/ropensci-news-june-2024/#ropensci-takes-over-maintenance-of-the-goodpractice-package) before Gábor gave the green light for us to take over maintenance of the package [exactly two years ago (28th May 2024)](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice/commit/c3f0b8e4c8e2cd7d88361bb670dd79284e6494d1).
```

I don't understand why Gábor gave the green light given he was no longer maintaining it at that point?

Author: Just because he was the original creator. I also got the green light from Karina Marks, but also thought ultimate say really belonged to Gabor.

We're really pleased to share that we've recently rolled out a host of updates and extensions to the package.
These make it both easier to use, and more powerful.

## Easier control of checks

The goodpractice package is a convenience wrapper around several other packages including [rcmdcheck](https://rcmdcheck.r-lib.org), [lintr](https://lintr.r-lib.org), [cyclocomp](https://github.com/gaborcsardi/cyclocomp), and [desc](https://desc.r-lib.org/), along with a few hand-coded checks within the package itself.
The previous version of goodpractice had a total of 230 checks, generally prefixed with the name of the package which defined each check.
Checks were identifiable with the single function, [`all_checks()`](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_checks.html).
The only way to control which checks were run was to pass a `checks` parameter to the main function as a character vector of the names of checks you wanted to run.
So, for example, if you wanted to skip the [rcmdcheck](https://rcmdcheck.r-lib.org) checks, you had to do something like this:
``` r

> mychecks <- all_checks()[which(!grepl("^rcmdcheck", all_checks()))]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
mychecks <- grepv("^rcmdcheck", all_checks(), invert = TRUE)
```

Author: I was trying to make that extra-clunky there, but okay, I'll accept that. Thanks :wink:

Checks can be controlled by simply naming the check groups you want to run, like this:

``` r
gp(checks = checks_by_group("description", "lintr"))
```

## New check groups

The documentation for the [`all_check_groups()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/all_check_groups.html) shows all the new check groups added in this update, including:
- A "description" group to check common issues with `DESCRIPTION` files, including formatting issues with URLs, DOIs, package names, and author and contributor roles, along with other common `DESCRIPTION` issues.
- An "rd" group to check whether or not `man/*.Rd` function documentation includes both example code and return values (regardless of whether or not documentation files are generated by [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/)).
- A [roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) group of checks applied where that package is used to generate documentation.
- An optional [revdep](https://github.com/r-lib/revdepcheck) group for reverse-dependency checking (not run by default).

> - "code_structure" checks for a few common issues like functions which are duplicated, or not actually used.

Reviewer 3: This item has no link, and for some reason from this item the phrasing changes. All items before that have "the blabla group", which was predictable.

Maybe this could even be a table? A column with the linked name, default yes/no, short explanation.

Author: yeah, table is a great idea. Now done; thank you

- "package_structure" checks like whether a package has a README, a NEWS file, or whether all files use a `.R` extension, and not `.r`.
- [spelling](https://docs.ropensci.org/spelling/) checks.
- A group of optional [tidyverse](https://tidyverse.org) checks, to check compliance with the [*Tidyverse style guide*](https://style.tidyverse.org/). These are mostly [lintr](https://lintr.r-lib.org/) checks, and are not run by default.
- [urlchecker](https://urlchecker.r-lib.org/) to check whether all URLs are valid.
- A "vignette" group to check that vignette code does not use either `rm()` or `setwd()`.

> Many of these checks are powered by [treesitter](https://davisvaughan.github.io/r-tree-sitter/), the extremely efficient syntax parsing library used by GitHub — which is genuinely neat to have working in R.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many of these checks are powered by [treesitter](/blog/2026/04/02/tree-sitter-overview/), the extremely efficient syntax parsing library used by GitHub — which is genuinely neat to have working in R.
```

😜

## Improved check reporting

The goodpractice package has always been designed for console output.
This updated version now provides immediate and consistent detail on check progress while running.
The [cli package](https://cli.r-lib.org) is also used to give consistently formatted output for all check groups.

The large increase in numbers of checks also means that directly printing goodpractice results may fill several screens of output.
This update also adds a `groups` parameter to the [`print()` method](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/print.goodPractice.html), to enable printing check results only for specified groups.
So you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.
We've found this turns what could feel like an overwhelming wall of output into a manageable to-do list.

## Let us know what you think

Like all rOpenSci packages, goodpractice is a community effort that lives through community use and feedback.

> We'd love to hear what you think, via social media, or through issues on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice).

Reviewer 3: I'd remove social media, which is mostly monitored by @yabellini & @steffilazerte , and does not seem ideal for this kind of interactions?

Author: I get that, but I also think that we should generally encourage that as much as possible. Easy for one of them to ping me if anything direct comes up. So I'd prefer to leave that, if that's okay?

Reviewer 4: Feedback on the package should go to the issues repo, not social media. We can lost track of comments very easy. 

We have a lot of channels and monitoring that is a lot of work. In this times of the world is also a very hard work to do. I'm trying to reduce the time I have to use for social media. 

If you want a more direct way of communication, you can share your email here and you will get the messages in your inbox.

Author: Thanks @yabellini, "social media" has been removed

This updated version now provides immediate and consistent detail on check progress while running.
The [cli package](https://cli.r-lib.org) is also used to give consistently formatted output for all check groups.

The large increase in numbers of checks also means that directly printing goodpractice results may fill several screens of output.
This update also adds a `groups` parameter to the [`print()` method](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/print.goodPractice.html), to enable printing check results only for specified groups.
So you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.
We've found this turns what could feel like an overwhelming wall of output into a manageable to-do list.
Like this:
``` r
x <- gp()
print(x, "description")
#> [1] Aww! Shining package! Keep up the priceless work!
```

## Let us know what you think

Like all rOpenSci packages, goodpractice is a community effort that lives through community use and feedback.

> We'd love to hear what you think, via social media, or through issues on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice).

Author: ```suggestion
We'd love to hear what you think, via email, or through issues on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/goodpractice).
```

Reviewer 3: @mpadge you need to add an email address for it not to end in `info@ropensci.org` :wink:

Author: done

This update also adds a `groups` parameter to the [`print()` method](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/print.goodPractice.html), to enable printing check results only for specified groups.
So you can run the main [`gp()` function](https://docs.ropensci.org/goodpractice/reference/gp.html) once, then step through each check group by printing results only for that group, fixing those, and then moving on to the next.
We've found this turns what could feel like an overwhelming wall of output into a manageable to-do list.
Like this:
``` r
x <- gp()
print(x, "description")

> #> [1] Aww! Shining package! Keep up the priceless work!

Reviewer 3: could it be an example with a few problems? 😅 more complicated to set up, but more interesting to see?

Author: Yep, the package itself even triggers a couple of those. Now added.
